
Associating Meaning to Form:
Pairing Link Grammar Disjuncts to WordNet Senses

Linas Vepstas
March 2009

Abstract:
This paper provides a breif report on an experiment pairing WordNet
senses[ref] to the atomic syntactical forms used by the Link Grammar
theory of parsing[ref]. The basic insight is the observation that,
sometimes, one can determine which sense is intended, of several senses
that a word
may have, simply by seeing how it is used in a sentence. Thus, for
example, while the word "suffer" has many meanings, when it is used
in the sentence: "She suffered a fracture in the accident", its meaning 
is (more or less) unambiguosly narrowed down to one, the one sense that most
readers would agree on.  At the same time, the word "suffer" can be used
in a wide variety of syntactic constructions: most grammars provide a
list of rules under which the word "suffer" can be used in a
grammatically correct way in a sentence; Link Grammar has hundreds of
such rules (or "disjuncts") for this word alone.  

Can specific meanings be associated with narrow grammatical usages?
A rough pairing of form and content has been obvious for centuries: 
the set of possible meanings of a word is narrowed down by assigning
to it a part-of-speech. Insofar as Link Grammar disjuncts resemble
very fine-grained part-of-speech markup, the goal of this paper is
to further narrow down the possible meanings of a word by localizing
them to particular grammatical usages. And vice-versa: given a
particular gramatical usage, can its meaning be induced?


Introduction

A core idea of linguistics is that structure carries meaning.  A broad
focus of much modern work in linguistics is to determine how structure
encodes meaning.  The present article explores a narrow corner of this
pairing: the pairing of WordNet word senses to Link Grammar disjuncts.
The pairing is performed in the context of automated statistical corpus
analysis, making use of an all-words sense disambiguation algorithm 
developed by Rada Mihalcea and others[refs]. Word senses assigned by a
Mihalcea-like algorithm are statistically correlated to the output of
the Link Grammar parser, to obtain pairs (word-sense, disjunct) having a
high value of mutual information.  

A key finding, perhaps "obvious" and expected, is that, of course, 
certain disjuncts are highly correllated with certain word senses. 
This allows for a practical means of (rapidly) assigning meaning
(by table lookup) to some (but not all) words of a sentence, based 
strictly on the result of a parse.  Because the Link Grammar disjuncts
are very low-level, nearly "atomic" or indivisible parts of syntax, 
it is hoped that such sense-pairing can provide a foundation for 
higher-level, hierarchical work pairing more complex structural forms
to meaning.

The general concept applied here should not be particular to either Link
Grammar, nor to WordNet or the Mihalcea word-sense dismabiguation
algorithm; it should be generalizable to almost any grammar, and
applicable whenever word senses can somehow be associated to words
occuring in a sentence. The particular choice of parser and WSD system
was simply a matter of convenience for the author. More generally, this
paper can be understood as an exploration of the use of statistical 
tools for exploring the correlation of stucture and meaning.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section
reviews the basic concepts of the Lin Grammar parser. The subsequent
section reviews WordNet and the WSD algorithm. This is followed by a
review of the definition of mutual information. After these reviews,
examples of the main results are presented, followed by a conclusion.

Link Grammar
Mihaclea
Mutual Info
Results
Conclusion
Biblio

The Link Grammar perser, when parsing this
sentence, uses a particular rule, or disjunct

fine-grained part-of-speech

construction grammar


