
Written on 10 December 2007:

This revision includes most changes recommended in "NumAlg09.fdf".  This
was an excellent review, which prompted me to rearrange the presentation
in order to make the development of the idea much clearer and
straightforward. The contents are much the same as before, except that
the order in which three different sections appeared has now been
changed, with the appropriate word-smithing between them to maintain a
coherent presentation. I believe the paper is now much better as a
result.


Below are responses to the most important issues raised by the reviewer.


-- A reference for the p-adic aka "multiplication theorem" for the
polylogarithm was requested. I am afraid that I don't know of one,
although Lewin's book may contain it (I cannot easily check at the
moment). The identity is fairly well-known, and at any rate is derivable
from the other forms of the multiplication theorem.

-- The reviewer suggests omitting or at least shortening the section on
the monodromy, accurately noting that it is a topic that lies rather far
from the normal discussion of numerical methods. I would rather not
change this section, for the following reasons: The material presented
is not terribly advanced, that it would be beyond the comprehension of
the readers of NUMA. On the contrary, it was written in a style that
should be accessible to most 1st or 2nd-year graduate students in
mathematics. Indeed, this section was written in reaction to the lack of
a decent low-brow review of the topic.  There are a few other published
discussions of the monodromy of various highly abstract generalizations
of the polylogarithm; however, these are abstract to the point of being
obtuse, requiring mastery of algebraic topology, category theory and
assorted topics in the theory of Calabi-Yau manifolds, if not string
theory in general. The current presentation is concrete and should be
easily accessible  to the interested reader. At the same time, the very
concreteness also implies that this section is probably not publishable
on a stand-alone basis: the study of monodromy mostly closed in the 19th
century, and exists today mostly as an introduction to knot theory and
algebraic topology. I believe this section makes the paper stronger and
more interesting. 



-- The reviewer asks about the notation F(q;s) used for the periodic
zeta function. Yes, this notation seems backwards, but it conforms to
that in Apostol's book on number theory, and so it would be tempting bad
luck to change the notation from the standard usage.  Yes, the F(q;s)
defined very simply in an earlier section is identical to that explored
in the last section. The earlier use requires only a very plain and
simple definition, and that is given. That this "simple" function is not
so simple is explored in greater detail in the last section.

-- To "straddle" means to sit astride a horse (or, in politics, a
fence). Thus, the "straddling point" is merely one of the pair of points
sitting astride a branch cut.  No worry, I changed the language to
eliminate this word. 

-- The reviewer asked for references for several formulas that I would
normally take as "well-known". I rather quickly slapped on the relevent
formula numbers from Abramowitz & Stegun. This might be perceived as
sloppy; a proper job would require an additional afternoon at the
library. I am willing to do this, but, for the sake of expediency, have
not done so.

-- I have had (and am continuing to have) some typesetting problems with
the bibliography, where punctuation, accents, and capitalization are not
working correctly.  While not yet resolved, I hope to resolve these a
bit later in the publication cycle. 
